Add `useOptimistic Hook` API reference documentation (#6377)
reactjs/react.dev: src/content/reference/react/useOptimistic.md

---
title: useOptimistic
canary: true
---

<Canary>

The `useOptimistic` Hook is currently only available in React's canary and experimental channels. Learn more about [React's release channels here](/community/versioning-policy#all-release-channels).

</Canary>

<Intro>

`useOptimistic` is a React Hook that lets you optimistically update the UI.

```js
  const [optimisticState, addOptimistic] = useOptimistic(state, updateFn);
```

</Intro>

<InlineToc />

---

## Reference {/*reference*/}

### `useOptimistic(state, updateFn)` {/*use*/}

`useOptimistic` is a React Hook that lets you optimistically update the UI.

```js
import { useOptimistic } from 'react';

function AppContainer() {
  const [optimisticState, addOptimistic] = useOptimistic(
    state,
    // updateFn
    (currentState, newState) => {
      // merge and return new state
    }
  );
}
```

[See more examples below.](#usage)

#### Parameters {/*parameters*/}

* `state`: `state` is the source of truth so if the `state` is ever changed and we get a new value in from the server, the return value `optimisticState` will be set the that too since it will always treat `state` as the final source of truth.

> * `updateFn`: `updateFn` is the mutation that will occur to `optimisticState` when `addOptimistic` is called. `updateFn` takes in two parameters. The `currentState` and the `newState`. The return value will be the merged value of the `currentState` and `newState`.

Reviewer: Hmm, I'm still kind of confused by `newState` -- what about `optimisticValue` instead? State implies that it is the state object, but when I see the messages example (the last one) your updateFn is
```
(state, newMessage) => [
      ...state,
      {
        text: newMessage,
        sending: true
      }
    ]
```

#### Returns {/*returns*/}

* `optimisticState`: `optimisticState` is the optimistic state, it will default to what `state` is.

> * `addOptimistic`: `addOptimistic` is the dispatching function to call that will run what we define in `updateFn`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `addOptimistic`: `addOptimistic` is the dispatching function to call when you have an optimistic update. It takes one argument, `optimisticValue`, of any type and will call the `updateFn` with `state` and `optimisticValue`.
```

Alternatively we could flush this section out like we do in `setState` like @mattcarrollcode mentioned: https://react-dev-git-fork-kmiddleton14-use-optimistic-fbopensource.vercel.app/reference/react/useState#setstate -- like how it creates another type signature explanation for the setter

Author: That's a good idea and one I can add in the second iteration

---

## Usage {/*usage*/}

### Optimistically update the UI while waiting for a network request {/*optimistically-update-while-waiting-for-network*/}

<Sandpack>

```js like-button.js active
import { useOptimistic } from "react";

export function LikeButton({ likes, updateLikes, disabled }) {
  const [optimisticLikes, addOptimisticLike] = useOptimistic(
    likes,
    (likes) => likes + 1
  );

  async function addLike() {
    addOptimisticLike();
    await updateLikes(likes);
  }

  return (

>     <button disabled={disabled} onClick={addLike}>

Reviewer: It looks like we need to wrap this in a transition, that might actually be a good caveat
<img width="998" alt="CleanShot 2023-10-25 at 18 14 58@2x" src="https://github.com/reactjs/react.dev/assets/1309636/50160c20-71b3-407a-8016-8222adc59780">

Author: I'll remove this example for now, and update it with the caveat and transition

      Like {optimisticLikes}
    </button>
  );
}
```

```js App.js
import { useState } from "react";
import { LikeButton } from "./like-button.js";

export default function App() {
  const [likes, setLikes] = useState(0);
  const [updating, setUpdating] = useState(false);
  async function updateLikes(num) {
    setUpdating(true);
    await new Promise((res) => setTimeout(res, 1000));
    setLikes(num + 1);
    setUpdating(false);
  }
  return (
    <LikeButton likes={likes} updateLikes={updateLikes} disabled={updating} />
  );
}
```

```json package.json hidden
{
  "dependencies": {
    "react": "experimental",
    "react-dom": "experimental",
    "react-scripts": "^5.0.0"
  },
  "main": "/index.js",
  "devDependencies": {}
}
```

</Sandpack>

### Optimistically updating forms {/*optimistically-updating-with-forms*/}

> The `useOptimistic` Hook provides a way to optimistically update the user interface before a background operation, like a network request, completes. In the context of forms, this technique helps to make apps feel more responsive. When a user submits a form, instead of waiting for the server's response to reflect the changes, the interface is immediately updated with the expected outcome.

Reviewer: I think this has been copied over from the form docs, which is fine, but some of the points mentioned here are generally about `useOptimistic` and might be better shared on the first example as it's kinda strange to be so verbose on the second but have no description for the first

---
title: useOptimistic
canary: true
---

<Canary>

The `useOptimistic` Hook is currently only available in React's canary and experimental channels. Learn more about [React's release channels here](/community/versioning-policy#all-release-channels).

</Canary>

<Intro>

`useOptimistic` is a React Hook that lets you optimistically update the UI.

```js
  const [optimistic, addOptimistic] = useOptimistic(initialState, updateFn);
```

</Intro>

<InlineToc />

---

## Reference {/*reference*/}

### `useOptimistic(initialState, updateFn)` {/*use*/}

> `useOptimistic` is a React Hook that lets you optimistically update the UI.

Reviewer 2: A few more sentences to outline how it accomplishes this, something like:

It accepts some state as an argument and returns a copy of that state that can be different during the duration of an async action such as a network request. You provide a function that takes the current state and the input to the action, and returns the _optimistic_ state to be used while the action is pending.

This state is called the "optimistic" state because it is usually used to immediately present the user with the result of performing an action, even though the action actually takes time to complete.

Reviewer: It is kinda redundant to say the same thing as the top, I think this place could be a better place to expand on what the hook does re Dave's point.

Author: Will update with the description

```js
import { useOptimistic } from 'react';

function AppContainer() {
  const [optimistic, addOptimistic] = useOptimistic(
    initialState,
    (currentState, newState) => {
      // merge and return new state
    }
  );
}
```

[See more examples below.](#usage)

#### Parameters {/*parameters*/}

> * `initialState`: `initialState` is the source of truth so if the `initialState` is ever changed and we get a new value in from the server, the return value `optimistic` will be set the that too since it will always treat `initialState` as the final source of truth.

Reviewer 2: `baseState`: the value to be returned initially and whenever no action is pending.

Author: I've updated it to `state` , but will revisit naming it to baseState

> * `updateFn`: `updateFn` is the mutation that will occur to `optimistic` when `addOptimistic` is called.

Reviewer 2: `reducer(currentState, input)`: a function that takes the current state and the input passed to `dispatch` and returns the resulting optimistic state.

#### Returns {/*returns*/}

> * `optimistic`: `optimistic` is the optimistic state, it will default to what `initialState` is.

Reviewer 2: `optimisticState`: The resulting optimistic state. It is equal to `baseState` unless an action is pending, in which case it is equal to the value returned by `reducer`.

> * `addOptimistic`: `addOptimistic` is the dispatching function to call that will run what we define in `updateFn`.

Reviewer 2: `dispatch(input)`: signals the beginning of an action. The input you provide will be passed to `reducer` to help it compute the optimistic state to be used while the action is pending.
